README.md, before:

# Scripts

This repository contains a collection of scripts and utilities. Some are generic enough to be useful to many others. Some are highly specific and might not be useful to anyone else at all. Many were created with the help of an AI model, typically Grok 2, Grok 3 or one of the Claude variants. They're pretty good at sorting out things like awk parameters or handling formatting of numbers and dates - not exactly BASH's strong suit after all.

## Files

These scripts help analyze and manage files and directories:

- [Find Oldest](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/blob/main/files/findoldest.md) - Find oldest files in a directory tree with detailed stats and date filtering (BASH)
- [Top Files](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/blob/main/files/topfiles.md) - List largest files (>1MB) in a directory tree (Python)
- [Top Directories](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/blob/main/files/topdirs.md) - List directories by total size in MB (Python)
- [Top Counts](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/blob/main/files/topcounts.md) - List directories containing the most files (Python)

## Dates

These scripts help with date and time operations:

- [Uptime Fancy](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/blob/main/dates/uptime-fancy.md) - Show system uptime with week number in a compact format (BASH)
- [Week Number](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/blob/main/dates/weeknumber.md) - Calculate ISO week numbers with formatted date output (Python)

## GitHub

These tools help manage GitHub repositories:

- [GitHubSync](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/blob/main/githubsync/githubsync.md) - Sync GitHub repositories with local copies, mostly intended as a backup mechanism (BASH)
- [CLOC](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/blob/main/cloc/cloc.md) - Add "count lines of code" to the README.md of a GitHub repository (GitHub Action)

## Repository Information

[![Count Lines of Code](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/actions/workflows/main.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/actions/workflows/main.yml)
<!--CLOC-START -->
```cloc
Last updated at 2025-06-10 03:46:13 UTC
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Language                     files          blank        comment           code
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bourne Shell                    13            603            564           3238
Markdown                         9            326              4            887
Python                           4             56              1            112
YAML                             3             16             26             72
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SUM:                            29           1001            595           4309
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
4 Files were skipped (duplicate, binary, or without source code):
  gitattributes: 1
  gitignore: 1
  license: 1
  txt: 1
```
<!--CLOC-END-->

## Sponsor / Donate / Support

If you find this work interesting, helpful, or valuable, or that it has saved you time, money, or both, please consider directly supporting these efforts financially via [GitHub Sponsors](https://github.com/sponsors/500Foods) or donating via [Buy Me a Pizza](https://www.buymeacoffee.com/andrewsimard500). Also, check out these other [GitHub Repositories](https://github.com/500Foods?tab=repositories&q=&sort=stargazers) that may interest you.

Commit message:

Add developer documentation and initial test script for tables.sh
- Created comprehensive documentation for the tables.sh script, detailing its architecture, core components, theme system, datatype system, data processing pipeline, rendering system, and guidelines for extending functionality.
- Included instructions for adding new themes and datatypes, implementing total functions, customizing output formats, and performance optimization strategies.
- Added a test script (tables_test_01.sh) to validate the rendering of a sample table with Kubernetes-style data, including layout and data JSON files.
- Implemented error handling and debug logging in the test script to facilitate troubleshooting.

README.md, after:

# Scripts

This repository contains a collection of scripts and utilities. Some are generic enough to be useful to many others. Some are highly specific and might not be useful to anyone else at all. Many were created with the help of an AI model, typically Grok 2, Grok 3 or one of the Claude variants. They're pretty good at sorting out things like awk parameters or handling formatting of numbers and dates - not exactly BASH's strong suit after all.

## Files

These scripts help analyze and manage files and directories:

- [Find Oldest](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/blob/main/files/findoldest.md) - Find oldest files in a directory tree with detailed stats and date filtering (BASH)
- [Top Files](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/blob/main/files/topfiles.md) - List largest files (>1MB) in a directory tree (Python)
- [Top Directories](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/blob/main/files/topdirs.md) - List directories by total size in MB (Python)
- [Top Counts](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/blob/main/files/topcounts.md) - List directories containing the most files (Python)

## Dates

These scripts help with date and time operations:

- [Uptime Fancy](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/blob/main/dates/uptime-fancy.md) - Show system uptime with week number in a compact format (BASH)
- [Week Number](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/blob/main/dates/weeknumber.md) - Calculate ISO week numbers with formatted date output (Python)

## Tables

These scripts help format and display data in terminal-friendly tables:

- [Tables](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/blob/main/tables/tables.md) - Render JSON data as customizable ASCII tables with themes, data formatting, and totals (BASH)

## Kubernetes

These scripts help manage and monitor Kubernetes clusters:

- [Node Info](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/blob/main/kubernetes/nodeinfo.md) - Display detailed information about nodes and pods in a Kubernetes cluster (BASH)
- [Domain Management](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/blob/main/kubernetes/dommgmt.md) - Audit ingress controllers and certificate manager configurations to identify mismatches (BASH)

## GitHub

These tools help manage GitHub repositories:

- [GitHubSync](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/blob/main/githubsync/githubsync.md) - Sync GitHub repositories with local copies, mostly intended as a backup mechanism (BASH)
- [CLOC](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/blob/main/cloc/cloc.md) - Add "count lines of code" to the README.md of a GitHub repository (GitHub Action)

## Repository Information

[![Count Lines of Code](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/actions/workflows/main.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/500Foods/Scripts/actions/workflows/main.yml)
<!--CLOC-START -->
```cloc
Last updated at 2025-06-10 03:46:13 UTC
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Language                     files          blank        comment           code
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bourne Shell                    13            603            564           3238
Markdown                         9            326              4            887
Python                           4             56              1            112
YAML                             3             16             26             72
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SUM:                            29           1001            595           4309
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
4 Files were skipped (duplicate, binary, or without source code):
  gitattributes: 1
  gitignore: 1
  license: 1
  txt: 1
```
<!--CLOC-END-->

## Sponsor / Donate / Support

If you find this work interesting, helpful, or valuable, or that it has saved you time, money, or both, please consider directly supporting these efforts financially via [GitHub Sponsors](https://github.com/sponsors/500Foods) or donating via [Buy Me a Pizza](https://www.buymeacoffee.com/andrewsimard500). Also, check out these other [GitHub Repositories](https://github.com/500Foods?tab=repositories&q=&sort=stargazers) that may interest you.
