tables/tables.md, before:

# Tables

A flexible utility for rendering JSON data as ANSI tables in terminal output. Tables.sh provides a powerful way to visualize structured data with customizable formatting, data processing, and display options.

## Overview

Tables.sh converts JSON data into beautifully formatted ANSI tables with the following features:

- Multiple visual themes with colored borders and distinct element colors
- Support for various data types (text, numbers, Kubernetes CPU/memory values)
- Customizable column configurations (headers, alignment, formatting, width)
- Data processing capabilities (sorting, validation, summaries calculation)
- Text wrapping and custom display options for null/zero values
- Title and footer support with flexible positioning
- Thousands separator formatting for numeric data

## Usage

```bash
./tables.sh <layout_json_file> <data_json_file> [OPTIONS]
```

### Parameters

- `layout_json_file`: JSON file defining table structure and formatting
- `data_json_file`: JSON file containing the data to display

### Options

- `--debug`: Enable debug output to stderr
- `--version`: Display version information
- `--help`, `-h`: Show help message

### Examples

```bash
# Basic table rendering
./tables.sh layout.json data.json

# With debug output
./tables.sh layout.json data.json --debug

# Show version
./tables.sh --version

# Show help
./tables.sh --help
```

## Layout JSON Structure

The layout file defines how the table should be structured and formatted:

```json
{
  "theme": "Red",
  "title": "Table Title",
  "title_position": "center",
  "footer": "Table Footer", 
  "footer_position": "center",
  "sort": [
    {"key": "column_key", "direction": "asc", "priority": 1}
  ],
  "columns": [
    {
      "header": "COLUMN NAME",
      "key": "json_field_name",
      "justification": "left",
      "datatype": "text",
      "null_value": "blank",
      "zero_value": "blank",
      "summary": "none",
      "break": false,
      "string_limit": 0,
      "wrap_mode": "clip",
      "wrap_char": "",
      "padding": 1,
      "width": 0,
      "format": ""
    }
  ]
}
```

### Theme Options

The `theme` field defines the visual appearance of the table:

- `"Red"`: Red borders with distinct colors for different table elements
- `"Blue"`: Blue borders with distinct colors for different table elements

Each theme includes specific colors for:

- **Border**: Table borders and separators
- **Header**: Table title text
- **Caption**: Column header text
- **Summary**: Summary/totals row text
- **Footer**: Footer text
- **Text**: Regular data content

### Title and Footer Support

Tables can include optional titles and footers with flexible positioning:

#### Title Configuration

- `title`: The title text to display above the table
- `title_position`: Position of the title relative to the table
  - `"left"`: Left-aligned title
  - `"right"`: Right-aligned title
  - `"center"`: Centered title
  - `"full"`: Title spans the full table width
  - `"none"`: No title (default)

#### Footer Configuration

- `footer`: The footer text to display below the table
- `footer_position`: Position of the footer relative to the table
  - `"left"`: Left-aligned footer
  - `"right"`: Right-aligned footer
  - `"center"`: Centered footer
  - `"full"`: Footer spans the full table width
  - `"none"`: No footer (default)

### Sort Configuration

The `sort` array allows sorting data by one or more columns:

- `key`: The column key to sort by
- `direction`: Either `"asc"` (ascending) or `"desc"` (descending)
- `priority`: Sort priority when multiple sort keys are defined (lower numbers have higher priority)

### Column Configuration Options

Each column in the `columns` array can have the following properties:

| Property | Description | Default | Options |
|----------|-------------|---------|---------|
| `header` | Column header text | (required) | Any string |
| `key` | JSON field name in the data | Derived from header | Any string |
| `justification` | Text alignment | `"left"` | `"left"`, `"right"`, `"center"` |
| `datatype` | Data type for validation and formatting | `"text"` | `"text"`, `"int"`, `"num"`, `"float"`, `"kcpu"`, `"kmem"` |
| `null_value` | How to display null values | `"blank"` | `"blank"`, `"0"`, `"missing"` |
| `zero_value` | How to display zero values | `"blank"` | `"blank"`, `"0"`, `"missing"` |
| `summary` | Type of summary to calculate | `"none"` | See "Summary Types" section |
| `break` | Insert separator when value changes | `false` | `true`, `false` |
| `string_limit` | Maximum string length | `0` (unlimited) | Any integer |
| `wrap_mode` | How to handle text exceeding limit | `"clip"` | `"clip"`, `"wrap"` |
| `wrap_char` | Character to use for wrapping | `""` | Any character |
| `padding` | Padding spaces on each side | `1` | Any integer |
| `width` | Fixed column width | `0` (auto) | Any integer |
| `format` | Custom format string | `""` | Format string |

## Supported Data Types

Tables.sh supports the following data types:

### text

Text data with optional wrapping and length limits.

- **Validation**: Any non-null text value
- **Formatting**: Raw text with optional clipping/wrapping
- **Summary Types**: `count`, `unique`

### int / float

Integer or floating-point numbers.

- **Validation**: Any valid number
- **Formatting**: Raw number or custom format string
- **Summary Types**: `sum`, `min`, `max`, `count`, `unique`

### num

Numeric values with thousands separator formatting.

- **Validation**: Any valid number
- **Formatting**: Numbers formatted with thousands separators (e.g., "1,234")
- **Summary Types**: `sum`, `min`, `max`, `count`, `unique`

### kcpu

Kubernetes-style CPU values (e.g., `100m` for 100 millicores).

- **Validation**: Values with `m` suffix or numeric values
- **Formatting**: Always with `m` suffix and thousands separators
- **Summary Types**: `sum`, `count`

### kmem

Kubernetes-style memory values (e.g., `128M`, `1G`, `512Ki`).

- **Validation**: Values with `K`, `M`, `G`, `Ki`, `Mi`, `Gi` suffixes
- **Formatting**: Normalized to `K`, `M`, or `G` format with thousands separators
- **Summary Types**: `sum`, `count`

## Summary Types

Depending on the data type, the following summary calculations are available:

- `sum`: Sum of all values (numeric types, kcpu, kmem)
- `min`: Minimum value (numeric types)
- `max`: Maximum value (numeric types)
- `count`: Count of non-null values (all types)
- `unique`: Count of unique values (all types)
- `none`: No summary (default)

## Example Tables

### Basic Example

This example renders a table of Kubernetes pod information:

**Layout JSON (layout.json):**

```json
{
  "theme": "Red",
  "columns": [
    {
      "header": "POD",
      "key": "pod",
      "justification": "left",
      "datatype": "text"
    },
    {
      "header": "NAMESPACE",
      "key": "namespace",
      "justification": "center",
      "datatype": "text"
    },
    {
      "header": "CPU USE",
      "key": "cpu_use",
      "justification": "right",
      "datatype": "kcpu",
      "summary": "sum"
    }
  ]
}
```

**Data JSON (data.json):**

```json
[
  {
    "pod": "pod-a",
    "namespace": "default",
    "cpu_use": "100m"
  },
  {
    "pod": "pod-b",
    "namespace": "kube-system",
    "cpu_use": "50m"
  }
]
```

**Command:**

```bash
./tables.sh layout.json data.json
```

**Output:**

```table
╭───────────┬────────────┬─────────╮
│POD        │ NAMESPACE  │  CPU USE│
├───────────┼────────────┼─────────┤
│pod-a      │  default   │     100m│
│pod-b      │kube-system │      50m│
├───────────┼────────────┼─────────┤
│           │            │     150m│
╰───────────┴────────────┴─────────╯
```

### Advanced Example with Title and Footer

This example demonstrates more features, including titles, footers, sorting, and summaries:

**Layout JSON:**

```json
{
  "theme": "Blue",
  "title": "Pod Resource Usage Report",
  "title_position": "center",
  "footer": "Generated by tables.sh",
  "footer_position": "right",
  "sort": [
    {"key": "namespace", "direction": "asc", "priority": 1},
    {"key": "pod", "direction": "asc", "priority": 2}
  ],
  "columns": [
    {
      "header": "POD",
      "key": "pod",
      "justification": "left",
      "datatype": "text",
      "summary": "count"
    },
    {
      "header": "NAMESPACE",
      "key": "namespace",
      "justification": "center",
      "datatype": "text",
      "break": true
    },
    {
      "header": "CPU USE",
      "key": "cpu_use",
      "justification": "right",
      "datatype": "kcpu",
      "null_value": "missing",
      "summary": "sum"
    },
    {
      "header": "MEM USE",
      "key": "mem_use",
      "justification": "right",
      "datatype": "kmem",
      "zero_value": "0",
      "summary": "sum"
    },
    {
      "header": "REQUESTS",
      "key": "requests",
      "justification": "right",
      "datatype": "num",
      "summary": "sum"
    }
  ]
}
```

**Data JSON:**

```json
[
  {
    "pod": "pod-a",
    "namespace": "ns1",
    "cpu_use": "100m",
    "mem_use": "128M",
    "requests": 1500
  },
  {
    "pod": "pod-b",
    "namespace": "ns1",
    "cpu_use": "50m",
    "mem_use": "64M",
    "requests": 750
  },
  {
    "pod": "pod-c",
    "namespace": "ns2",
    "cpu_use": null,
    "mem_use": "256M",
    "requests": 2000
  },
  {
    "pod": "pod-d",
    "namespace": "ns2",
    "cpu_use": "200m",
    "mem_use": null,
    "requests": 1200
  }
]
```

### Title and Footer Positioning Examples

**Short Title (shorter than table width):**

```json
{
  "title": "Pod Stats",
  "title_position": "left"
}
```

**Wide Title (wider than table width):**

```json
{
  "title": "Kubernetes Cluster Pod Resource Utilization Report - Production Environment",
  "title_position": "center"
}
```

**Full Width Title:**

```json
{
  "title": "System Report",
  "title_position": "full"
}
```

## Using in Scripts

You can source tables.sh in your own scripts to use its functions:

```bash
#!/usr/bin/env bash

# Source table library
source ./tables.sh

# Create layout and data files
cat > layout.json << 'EOF'
{
  "theme": "Red",
  "title": "Sample Report",
  "title_position": "center",
  "columns": [
    {
      "header": "NAME",
      "key": "name",
      "datatype": "text"
    },
    {
      "header": "VALUE",
      "key": "value",
      "datatype": "num",
      "summary": "sum"
    }
  ]
}
EOF

cat > data.json << 'EOF'
[
  {"name": "Item A", "value": 1000},
  {"name": "Item B", "value": 2500}
]
EOF

# Draw the table
draw_table layout.json data.json
```

## Tips and Best Practices

1. **Column Width Management**:
   - The script automatically determines column widths based on content
   - Use `width` property to set fixed column widths
   - Use `string_limit` and `wrap_mode` for wide columns

2. **Data Sorting**:
   - Complex sorting can be achieved with multiple sort keys and priorities
   - Use `break: true` to visually group data by important fields

3. **Null and Zero Handling**:
   - Choose appropriate `null_value` and `zero_value` settings for each column
   - Options include showing blank space, "0", or "Missing"

4. **Title and Footer Design**:
   - Use `title_position` and `footer_position` to control alignment
   - Consider table width when designing titles and footers
   - Use `"full"` position for titles/footers that should span the entire table width

5. **Performance**:
   - Very large datasets may cause performance issues
   - Consider limiting data or pre-filtering for large datasets

6. **Color Compatibility**:
   - The colored output uses ANSI escape sequences which work in most terminals
   - For environments without color support, consider piping through `cat -A` to see escape sequences

## Dependencies

- `jq` (JSON processor)
- `bash` 4.0+
- `awk`
- `sed`

## Version Information

Use `./tables.sh --version` to see the current version and `./tables.sh --help` for usage information.

Commit message:

Update README and developer documentation; refine footer commands in scripts; enhance summary functionality and test coverage

tables/tables.md, after:

# Tables

A flexible utility for rendering JSON data as ANSI tables in terminal output. Tables.sh provides a powerful way to visualize structured data with customizable formatting, data processing, and display options.

## Overview

Tables.sh converts JSON data into beautifully formatted ANSI tables with the following features:

- Multiple visual themes with colored borders and distinct element colors
- Support for various data types (text, numbers, Kubernetes CPU/memory values)
- Customizable column configurations (headers, alignment, formatting, width)
- Data processing capabilities (sorting, validation, summaries calculation)
- Text wrapping and custom display options for null/zero values
- Title and footer support with flexible positioning
- Thousands separator formatting for numeric data

## Usage

```bash
./tables.sh <layout_json_file> <data_json_file> [OPTIONS]
```

### Parameters

- `layout_json_file`: JSON file defining table structure and formatting
- `data_json_file`: JSON file containing the data to display

### Options

- `--debug`: Enable debug output to stderr
- `--version`: Display version information
- `--help`, `-h`: Show help message

### Examples

```bash
# Basic table rendering
./tables.sh layout.json data.json

# With debug output
./tables.sh layout.json data.json --debug

# Show version
./tables.sh --version

# Show help
./tables.sh --help
```

## Layout JSON Structure

The layout file defines how the table should be structured and formatted:

```json
{
  "theme": "Red",
  "title": "Table Title",
  "title_position": "center",
  "footer": "Table Footer", 
  "footer_position": "center",
  "sort": [
    {"key": "column_key", "direction": "asc", "priority": 1}
  ],
  "columns": [
    {
      "header": "COLUMN NAME",
      "key": "json_field_name",
      "justification": "left",
      "datatype": "text",
      "null_value": "blank",
      "zero_value": "blank",
      "summary": "none",
      "break": false,
      "string_limit": 0,
      "wrap_mode": "clip",
      "wrap_char": "",
      "padding": 1,
      "width": 0,
      "format": ""
    }
  ]
}
```

### Theme Options

The `theme` field defines the visual appearance of the table:

- `"Red"`: Red borders with distinct colors for different table elements
- `"Blue"`: Blue borders with distinct colors for different table elements

Each theme includes specific colors for:

- **Border**: Table borders and separators
- **Header**: Table title text
- **Caption**: Column header text
- **Summary**: Summary/totals row text
- **Footer**: Footer text
- **Text**: Regular data content

### Title and Footer Support

Tables can include optional titles and footers with flexible positioning:

#### Title Configuration

- `title`: The title text to display above the table
- `title_position`: Position of the title relative to the table
  - `"left"`: Left-aligned title
  - `"right"`: Right-aligned title
  - `"center"`: Centered title
  - `"full"`: Title spans the full table width
  - `"none"`: No title (default)

#### Footer Configuration

- `footer`: The footer text to display below the table
- `footer_position`: Position of the footer relative to the table
  - `"left"`: Left-aligned footer
  - `"right"`: Right-aligned footer
  - `"center"`: Centered footer
  - `"full"`: Footer spans the full table width
  - `"none"`: No footer (default)

### Sort Configuration

The `sort` array allows sorting data by one or more columns:

- `key`: The column key to sort by
- `direction`: Either `"asc"` (ascending) or `"desc"` (descending)
- `priority`: Sort priority when multiple sort keys are defined (lower numbers have higher priority)

### Column Configuration Options

Each column in the `columns` array can have the following properties:

| Property | Description | Default | Options |
|----------|-------------|---------|---------|
| `header` | Column header text | (required) | Any string |
| `key` | JSON field name in the data | Derived from header | Any string |
| `justification` | Text alignment | `"left"` | `"left"`, `"right"`, `"center"` |
| `datatype` | Data type for validation and formatting | `"text"` | `"text"`, `"int"`, `"num"`, `"float"`, `"kcpu"`, `"kmem"` |
| `null_value` | How to display null values | `"blank"` | `"blank"`, `"0"`, `"missing"` |
| `zero_value` | How to display zero values | `"blank"` | `"blank"`, `"0"`, `"missing"` |
| `summary` | Type of summary to calculate | `"none"` | See "Summary Types" section |
| `break` | Insert separator when value changes | `false` | `true`, `false` |
| `string_limit` | Maximum string length | `0` (unlimited) | Any integer |
| `wrap_mode` | How to handle text exceeding limit | `"clip"` | `"clip"`, `"wrap"` |
| `wrap_char` | Character to use for wrapping | `""` | Any character |
| `padding` | Padding spaces on each side | `1` | Any integer |
| `width` | Fixed column width | `0` (auto) | Any integer |
| `format` | Custom format string | `""` | Format string |

## Supported Data Types

Tables.sh supports the following data types:

### text

Text data with optional wrapping and length limits.

- **Validation**: Any non-null text value
- **Formatting**: Raw text with enhanced clipping and wrapping options
- **Summary Types**: `count`, `unique`

### int / float

Integer or floating-point numbers.

- **Validation**: Any valid number
- **Formatting**: Raw number or custom format string
- **Summary Types**: `sum`, `min`, `max`, `count`, `unique`

### num

Numeric values with thousands separator formatting.

- **Validation**: Any valid number
- **Formatting**: Numbers formatted with thousands separators (e.g., "1,234")
- **Summary Types**: `sum`, `min`, `max`, `count`, `unique`

### kcpu

Kubernetes-style CPU values (e.g., `100m` for 100 millicores).

- **Validation**: Values with `m` suffix or numeric values
- **Formatting**: Always with `m` suffix and thousands separators
- **Summary Types**: `sum`, `count`

### kmem

Kubernetes-style memory values (e.g., `128M`, `1G`, `512Ki`).

- **Validation**: Values with `K`, `M`, `G`, `Ki`, `Mi`, `Gi` suffixes
- **Formatting**: Normalized to `K`, `M`, or `G` format with thousands separators
- **Summary Types**: `sum`, `count`

## Summary Types

Depending on the data type, the following summary calculations are available:

- `sum`: Sum of all values (numeric types, kcpu, kmem)
- `min`: Minimum value (numeric types)
- `max`: Maximum value (numeric types)
- `avg`: Average value (numeric types)
- `count`: Count of non-null values (all types)
- `unique`: Count of unique values (all types)
- `none`: No summary (default)

## Example Tables

### Basic Example

This example renders a table of Kubernetes pod information:

**Layout JSON (layout.json):**

```json
{
  "theme": "Red",
  "columns": [
    {
      "header": "POD",
      "key": "pod",
      "justification": "left",
      "datatype": "text"
    },
    {
      "header": "NAMESPACE",
      "key": "namespace",
      "justification": "center",
      "datatype": "text"
    },
    {
      "header": "CPU USE",
      "key": "cpu_use",
      "justification": "right",
      "datatype": "kcpu",
      "summary": "sum"
    }
  ]
}
```

**Data JSON (data.json):**

```json
[
  {
    "pod": "pod-a",
    "namespace": "default",
    "cpu_use": "100m"
  },
  {
    "pod": "pod-b",
    "namespace": "kube-system",
    "cpu_use": "50m"
  }
]
```

**Command:**

```bash
./tables.sh layout.json data.json
```

**Output:**

```table
╭───────────┬────────────┬─────────╮
│POD        │ NAMESPACE  │  CPU USE│
├───────────┼────────────┼─────────┤
│pod-a      │  default   │     100m│
│pod-b      │kube-system │      50m│
├───────────┼────────────┼─────────┤
│           │            │     150m│
╰───────────┴────────────┴─────────╯
```

### Advanced Example with Title and Footer

This example demonstrates more features, including titles, footers, sorting, and summaries:

**Layout JSON:**

```json
{
  "theme": "Blue",
  "title": "Pod Resource Usage Report",
  "title_position": "center",
  "footer": "Generated by tables.sh",
  "footer_position": "right",
  "sort": [
    {"key": "namespace", "direction": "asc", "priority": 1},
    {"key": "pod", "direction": "asc", "priority": 2}
  ],
  "columns": [
    {
      "header": "POD",
      "key": "pod",
      "justification": "left",
      "datatype": "text",
      "summary": "count"
    },
    {
      "header": "NAMESPACE",
      "key": "namespace",
      "justification": "center",
      "datatype": "text",
      "break": true
    },
    {
      "header": "CPU USE",
      "key": "cpu_use",
      "justification": "right",
      "datatype": "kcpu",
      "null_value": "missing",
      "summary": "sum"
    },
    {
      "header": "MEM USE",
      "key": "mem_use",
      "justification": "right",
      "datatype": "kmem",
      "zero_value": "0",
      "summary": "sum"
    },
    {
      "header": "REQUESTS",
      "key": "requests",
      "justification": "right",
      "datatype": "num",
      "summary": "sum"
    }
  ]
}
```

**Data JSON:**

```json
[
  {
    "pod": "pod-a",
    "namespace": "ns1",
    "cpu_use": "100m",
    "mem_use": "128M",
    "requests": 1500
  },
  {
    "pod": "pod-b",
    "namespace": "ns1",
    "cpu_use": "50m",
    "mem_use": "64M",
    "requests": 750
  },
  {
    "pod": "pod-c",
    "namespace": "ns2",
    "cpu_use": null,
    "mem_use": "256M",
    "requests": 2000
  },
  {
    "pod": "pod-d",
    "namespace": "ns2",
    "cpu_use": "200m",
    "mem_use": null,
    "requests": 1200
  }
]
```

### Title and Footer Positioning Examples

**Short Title (shorter than table width):**

```json
{
  "title": "Pod Stats",
  "title_position": "left"
}
```

**Wide Title (wider than table width):**

```json
{
  "title": "Kubernetes Cluster Pod Resource Utilization Report - Production Environment",
  "title_position": "center"
}
```

**Full Width Title:**

```json
{
  "title": "System Report",
  "title_position": "full"
}
```

## Using in Scripts

You can source tables.sh in your own scripts to use its functions:

```bash
#!/usr/bin/env bash

# Source table library
source ./tables.sh

# Create layout and data files
cat > layout.json << 'EOF'
{
  "theme": "Red",
  "title": "Sample Report",
  "title_position": "center",
  "columns": [
    {
      "header": "NAME",
      "key": "name",
      "datatype": "text"
    },
    {
      "header": "VALUE",
      "key": "value",
      "datatype": "num",
      "summary": "sum"
    }
  ]
}
EOF

cat > data.json << 'EOF'
[
  {"name": "Item A", "value": 1000},
  {"name": "Item B", "value": 2500}
]
EOF

# Draw the table
draw_table layout.json data.json
```

## Tips and Best Practices

1. **Column Width Management**:
   - The script automatically determines column widths based on content
   - Use `width` property to set fixed column widths
   - Use `string_limit` and `wrap_mode` for wide columns

2. **Data Sorting**:
   - Complex sorting can be achieved with multiple sort keys and priorities
   - Use `break: true` to visually group data by important fields

3. **Null and Zero Handling**:
   - Choose appropriate `null_value` and `zero_value` settings for each column
   - Options include showing blank space, "0", or "Missing"

4. **Title and Footer Design**:
   - Use `title_position` and `footer_position` to control alignment
   - Consider table width when designing titles and footers
   - Use `"full"` position for titles/footers that should span the entire table width

5. **Performance**:
   - Very large datasets may cause performance issues
   - Consider limiting data or pre-filtering for large datasets

6. **Testing**:
   - The project includes an extensive suite of test scripts to ensure reliability
   - These tests cover various scenarios and edge cases for robust functionality

7. **Color Compatibility**:
   - The colored output uses ANSI escape sequences which work in most terminals
   - For environments without color support, consider piping through `cat -A` to see escape sequences

## Dependencies

- `jq` (JSON processor)
- `bash` 4.0+
- `awk`
- `sed`

## Version Information

Use `./tables.sh --version` to see the current version and `./tables.sh --help` for usage information.
